Add guide for the Ballerina strand dump tool (#5269)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/learn-the-platform/ballerina-tooling/strand-dump-tool.md

---
title: Strand dump tool
description: Check out how you can dump and inspect the currently available strands of a Ballerina program.
keywords: ballerina runtime, troubleshoot, strand dump, thread dump
permalink: /learn/strand-dump-tool/
active: strand-dump-tool
redirect_from:
  - /learn/strand-dump-tool
---

> Ballerina runtime can have unexpected behaviors due to user code errors, bugs or issues with the running environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ballerina runtime can have unexpected behaviors due to user code errors, bugs, or issues with the running environment. 
```

These will result in memory leaks, CPU spinning, runtime hangs, performance degradation or crashing with various errors. 
Ballerina provides a tool to dump the status of currently running strands.

## Strand dump

Ballerina strand dump provides information on the available strands and strand groups during the execution of 
a Ballerina program. This can be used to:

> - troubleshoot runtime errors,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- troubleshoot runtime errors
```

> - find data races, race conditions, livelocks and deadlocks,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- find data races, race conditions, livelocks, and deadlocks
```

> - inspect strand and strand group status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- inspect strand and strand group status
```

> >**Note:** Currently, this ability is only available in the operating systems where the `SIGTRAP` POSIX signal is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note:** Currently, this ability is only available in the operating systems in which the `SIGTRAP` POSIX signal is 
```

supported (`SIGTRAP` is not available on Windows).

### Get the strand dump

To get the strand dump when a Ballerina program is running, you need to know the process ID (PID) of the Ballerina 

> program. For that you can use the `jps` tool. Then you need to send the `SIGTRAP` signal to the process. The strand 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
program. For that, you can use the `jps` tool. Then, you need to send the `SIGTRAP` signal to the process. The strand 
```

dump will be produced to the standard output stream in the text format.

> As an example, consider the following Ballerina program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider the following Ballerina program.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.runtime;
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    future<int> addResult = start addnum(1, 2);
    int|error addition = wait addResult;
    io:println(addition);
}

function addnum(int num1, int num2) returns int {

    worker sender {
        runtime:sleep(1000);
        num1 -> receiver;
    }

    worker receiver returns int {
        int firstNum = <- sender;
        return num2 + firstNum;
    }

    int intResult = wait receiver;
    return intResult;
}
```

> Run this Ballerina package using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run this Ballerina package using the `bal run` command.
```

```

> $ bal run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ bal run
```
Sperate out the command and the CLI output of it to 2 code snippets.

Author: Did not do this because this is not done in other places also. E.g., https://ballerina.io/learn/get-started-with-ballerina/#run-the-package. If I do this, it is shown with a lot of space between the snippets.

Compiling source
	demo/strandDump:0.1.0

Running executable
```

> While the program is running, obtain its PID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Obtain its PID while the program is running.
```

```
$ jps
3408 Main
28851 Jps
28845 $_init
```

> Here for this program we get the PID as 28845, because `$_init` is the main class of the Ballerina program. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You get the PID for this program as 28845 because `$_init` is the main class of the Ballerina program. 
```

To get the strand dump, send the `SIGTRAP` signal to that process. You can use the following CLI command.
```
$ kill -SIGTRAP 28845
```
or
```
$ kill -5 28845
```

> Then the dump of the runtime strands will be emitted to the standard output stream of the Ballerina program. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, the dump of the runtime strands will be emitted to the standard output stream of the Ballerina program. 
```

> You can see a sample below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, see the sample below.
```

```text
Ballerina Strand Dump [2022/07/26 14:34:31]
===========================================
 
Current no. of strand groups    :       2
Current no. of strands          :       4
 
group 4 [QUEUED]: [1]
        strand 2 "main" [demo.strandDump.0:main] [WAITING]:
                at      demo.strandDump.0.1.0:main(main.bal:6)
 
group 5 [QUEUED]: [3]
        strand 3 "addResult" [demo.strandDump.0:main][2] [WAITING]:
                at      demo.strandDump.0.1.0:addnum(main.bal:22)
 
        strand 4 "sender" [demo.strandDump.0:addnum][3] [BLOCKED]:
                at      ballerina.lang.runtime.0.0.0:sleep(runtime.bal:61)
                        demo.strandDump.0.1.0:$lambda$_0(main.bal:13)
 
        strand 5 "receiver" [demo.strandDump.0:addnum][3] [BLOCKED ON WORKER MESSAGE RECEIVE]:
                at      demo.strandDump.0.1.0:$lambda$_1(main.bal:18)
 
===========================================
```

### Output format and available details

> The strand dump contains the information on the date and the time when the strand dump was obtained, and the current 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The strand dump contains the information on the date and the time when the strand dump was obtained and the current 
```

> no. of strand groups and strands available. The details will be given in the following format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of strand groups and strands available. The details will be given in the following format.
```

![Strand dump output format](/learn/images/strand-dump-output-format.svg "Strand dump output format")

Label | Description
-- | --

> Strand group ID | A unique ID given to a particular strand group. A strand group comprises a set of strands which run on the same thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strand group ID | A unique ID given to a particular strand group. A strand group comprises a set of strands that run on the same thread.
```

> Strand group state | Current state of the strand group. [See available states.](/learn/strand-dump-tool/#strand-group-states)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strand group state | Current state of the strand group. For the available states, see [Strand group states](/learn/strand-dump-tool/#strand-group-states).
```
This is the format we use to give hyperlinks in Ballerina docs.

> Current no. of strands in the strand group | A strand group consists of one or more strands. Only one of them runs on a thread at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current number of strands in the strand group | A strand group consists of one or more strands. Only one of them runs on a thread at a time.
```

Strand ID | A unique ID given to a particular strand.

> Strand name | Name of the strand associated with the strand ID. This is optional and omitted if not available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strand name | Name of the strand associated with the strand ID. This is optional and will be omitted if not available.
```

> Strand initiated module | Name of the module which created the strand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strand initiated module | Name of the module, which created the strand.
```

> Strand initiated function | Name of the function which created the strand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strand initiated function | Name of the function, which created the strand.
```

> Parent strand ID | ID of the parent strand. Omitted if there is no parent strand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parent strand ID | ID of the parent strand. This will be oimitted if there is no parent strand.
```

> Strand state | Current state of the strand. [See available states.](/learn/strand-dump-tool/#strand-states)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strand state | Current state of the strand. [See available states.](/learn/strand-dump-tool/#strand-states)
```
Use the same format as above.

> Strand yielded location stack trace | The stack trace which points to the location where the strand is blocked (yielded). This is omitted if the state is RUNNABLE or DONE. A line in the stack trace is given by the format: <br />`module name:function name(filename:line number)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strand yielded location stack trace | The stack trace, which points to the location where the strand is blocked (yielded). This is omitted if the state is `RUNNABLE` or `DONE`. A line in the stack trace is given by the format: <br />`module name:function name(filename:line number)`
```

#### Strand group states

State | Description
-- | --

> RUNNABLE | Strand group is ready to run or currently running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUNNABLE | Strand group is ready to run or is currently running.
```

> QUEUED | Strand group execution is blocked or completed or it comprises a new set of strands which are not yet scheduled to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QUEUED | Strand group execution is blocked or completed or it comprises a new set of strands that are not yet scheduled to run.
```

#### Strand states

State | Description
-- | --
WAITING FOR LOCK | Strand is waiting to acquire a lock.

> BLOCKED ON WORKER MESSAGE SEND | Strand is blocked due to `sync send` action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BLOCKED ON WORKER MESSAGE SEND | Strand is blocked due to the `sync send` action.
```

> BLOCKED ON WORKER MESSAGE RECEIVE | Strand is blocked due to `receive` action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BLOCKED ON WORKER MESSAGE RECEIVE | Strand is blocked due to the `receive` action.
```

> BLOCKED ON WORKER MESSAGE FLUSH | Strand is blocked due to `flush` action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BLOCKED ON WORKER MESSAGE FLUSH | Strand is blocked due to the `flush` action.
```

> WAITING | Strand is blocked due to `wait` action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WAITING | Strand is blocked due to the `wait` action.
```

> BLOCKED | Strand is blocked due to any other reason than the above. E.g. sleep, external function call, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BLOCKED | Strand is blocked due to any other reason than the above. E.g., sleep, external function call, etc.
```

> RUNNABLE | Strand is ready to run or currently running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUNNABLE | Strand is ready to run or is currently running.
```
